---
arc: 5114
title: Community Algorand Standard for Soulbound Tokens
status: Draft
requires: [ARC-69](https://arc.algorand.foundation/ARCs/arc-0069)
discussions-to: https://github.com/algorandfoundation/grow-algorand/issues/181
---

# Community Algorand Standard for Soulbound Tokens

## Summary

We introduce community conventions for the parameters and the atomic transfers of Algorand Standard Assets (ASAs) representing Soulbound Tokens (SBTs) or badges.

## Abstract

The goal of these conventions is to make it easy and straightforward to issue SBTs on Algorand. These ASAs can represent commitments, credentials and affiliations and should be publicly visible and non-transferable (but possibly revocable-by-the-issuer). 

## Other Discussions

Based on [this discussion](https://github.com/algorandfoundation/ARCs/pull/117), SBTs should be a specific application of [ARC-20](https://github.com/algorandfoundation/ARCs/pull/119). While this may be possible for much more complex SBT implementations, in this ARC we introduce a way of implementing them without the need of smart contracts. This is why this ARC can be considered an extension of [ARC-69](https://arc.algorand.foundation/ARCs/arc-0069). Furthermore, as we use on-chain metadata, existing ASAs can be converted to SBTs if required.

Other developers suggest that the use of `Clawback Address` should be avoided, as it is believed not to "...make sense when NFT is irreversibly bound to the address". On the contrary, this ARC uses the clawback feature for the cases where commitments, credentials or affiliations need to be revoked by the issuer. As this is not considered a token transfer, the concept of Soulbound remains intact. This is why a special primitive is suggested and described for this matter.

## Rationale

Most of the ideas exposed here have been inspired by [Decentralized Society: Finding Web3's Soul](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4105763) and [this thread](https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-5114-soulbound-badges/9417/57).

Based on the publication, for a token to be described as Soulbound, it must meet the following criteria:

1. Publicly verifiable
2. Non-fungible
3. Non-transferable
4. Possibly revocable by the issuer

The Algorand blockchain provides the means for publicly verifiable transactions. The [ARC-69](https://arc.algorand.foundation/ARCs/arc-0069) sets the conventions for creating non-fungible tokens. To make NFTs non-transferable, thereby becoming soulbound, the `Manager Address`, `Freeze Address` and `Clawback Address` parameters should be specified as shown below.

## Specification

The key words "**MUST**", "**MUST NOT**", "**REQUIRED**", "**SHALL**", "**SHALL NOT**", "**SHOULD**", "**SHOULD NOT**", "**RECOMMENDED**", "**MAY**", and "**OPTIONAL**" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC-2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

An ARC-5114 ASA has an associated JSON Metadata file, formatted as specified below, that is stored on-chain in the note field of the most recent asset configuration transaction (that contains a note field with a valid ARC-5114 JSON metadata).

### ASA Parameters Conventions

The ASA parameters should follow the following conventions:

* *Unit Name* (`un`): no restriction. 
* *Asset Name* (`an`): no restriction.
* *Asset URL* (`au`): a URI pointing to a digital media file. This URI:
    * **SHOULD** be persistent.
    * **SHOULD** link to a file small enough to fetch quickly in a gallery view.
    * **MUST** follow [RFC-3986](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3986.txt) and **MUST NOT** contain any whitespace character.
    * **SHOULD** specify media type with `#` fragment identifier at end of URL. This format **MUST** follow: `#i` for images, `#v` for videos, `#a` for audio, `#p` for PDF, or `#h` for HTML/interactive digital media.  If unspecified, assume Image.
    * **SHOULD** use one of the following URI schemes (for compatibility and security): *https* and *ipfs*:
        * When the file is stored on IPFS, the `ipfs://...` URI **SHOULD** be used. IPFS Gateway URI (such as `https://ipfs.io/ipfs/...`) **SHOULD NOT** be used.
    * **SHOULD NOT** use the following URI scheme: *http* (due to security concerns).
* *Asset Metadata Hash* (`am`): the SHA-256 digest of the full resolution media file as a 32-byte string (as defined in [NIST FIPS 180-4](https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.180-4))
    * **OPTIONAL**
* *Freeze Address* (`f`): 
    * **MUST** be provided and **SHOULD** be under the control of the ASA creator
* *Clawback Address* (`c`): 
    * **MUST** be provided and **SHOULD** be under the control of the ASA creator
* *Manager Address* (`m`): 
    * **MUST** be provided and **SHOULD** be under the control of the ASA creator

The main difference between ARC-5114 and ARC-69 is that the former calls for mutability, in order for the issuer to be able to freeze the SBT, issue a new version of it or revoke it. This is why the `Freeze Address`, the `Clawback Address` and the `Manager Address` **MUST** be provided and they all **SHOULD** be under the control of the ASA creator. There are no requirements regarding the `Reserve Address` of the ASA.

### JSON Metadata File Schema

ARC-5114 metadata is an extension of the ARC-69 metadata but with the introduction of a new `status` field.

```json
{
    "title": "Soulbound Token Metadata",
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
        "standard": {
            "type": "string",
            "value": "ARC5114",
            "description": "(Required) Describes the standard used."
        },
        "issuer": {
            "type": "string",
            "description": "(Required) Algorand account of the issuer of the soulbound token or badge."
        },
        "claimer": {
            "type": "string",
            "description": "(Required) Algorand account of the claimer of the soulbound token or badge."
        },
        "status": {
            "type": "string",
            "value": "issued | claimed | revoked",
            "description": "(Required) Describes the current status of the soulbound token or badge."
        },
        "iat": {
            "type": "number",
            "description": "Block number that indicates when the SBT was issued."
        },
        "exp": {
            "type": "number",
            "description": "Block number that indicates when this SBT expires."
        },
        "description": {
            "type": "string",
            "description": "Describes the asset to which this token represents."
        },
        "external_url": {
            "type": "string",
            "description": "A URI pointing to an external website. Borrowed from Open Sea's metadata format (https://docs.opensea.io/docs/metadata-standards)."
        },
        "media_url": {
            "type": "string",
            "description": "A URI pointing to a high resolution version of the asset's media."
        },
        "properties": {
            "type": "object", 
            "description": "Properties following the EIP-1155 'simple properties' format. (https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1155.md#erc-1155-metadata-uri-json-schema)"
        },
        "mime_type": {
            "type": "string",
            "description": "Describes the MIME type of the ASA's URL (`au` field)."
        },
        "attributes": {
            "type": "array",
            "description": "(Deprecated. New NFTs should define attributes with the simple `properties` object. Marketplaces should support both the `properties` object and the `attributes` array). The `attributes` array follows Open Sea's format: https://docs.opensea.io/docs/metadata-standards#attributes"
        }
    },
    "required":[
        "standard",
        "issuer",
        "claimer",
        "status"
    ]
}
```
The `standard`, `issuer`, `claimer` and `status` fields are **REQUIRED**. All other fields are **OPTIONAL**. If provided, the other fields **MUST** match the description in the JSON schema.

The URI field (`external_url`) is defined similarly to the Asset URL parameter `au`.
However, contrary to the Asset URL, the `external_url` does not need to link to the digital media file.

#### MIME Type

In addition to specifying a data type in the ASA's URL (`au` field) with a URI fragment (ex: `#v` for video), the JSON Metadata schema also allows indication of the URL's MIME type (ex: `video/mp4`) via the `mime_type` field.

#### Examples

##### Basic Example

An example of an ARC-5114 JSON Metadata file for a hackathon badge follows. The properties array proposes some **SUGGESTED** formatting for token-specific display properties and metadata.

```json
{
  "standard": "ARC5114",
  "issuer": "EHZMYXLWT7FNOTVS2DV6P4QDD6CKDLDJA5LTPWOZ7KQEA6RRCGJJSLPEDM",
  "claimer": "J6CQEISJYH324FNYXHKISFGJQZRRUIUW5ADNQEH34NJ3TVDTD32KJ36K34",
  "status": "issued",
  "description": "ARC5114 Hackathon Soulbound Badge",
  "mime_type": "image/jpeg",
  "properties": {
    "Organization":"Algorand GreenHouse", 
    "Challenge":"NFT", 
    "Prize":"1st Place"
  }
}
```

An example of possible ASA parameters would be:

* *Asset Name*: `ARC5114 Hackathon Badge` for example.
* *Unit Name*: `5114HB` for example.
* *Asset URL*: `ipfs://QmWS1VAdMD353A6SDk9wNyvkT14kyCiZrNDYAad4w1tKqT#v`
* *Metadata Hash*: the 32 bytes of the SHA-256 digest of the high resolution media file.
* *Total Number of Units*: 1
* *Number of Digits after the Decimal Point*: 0

#### Mutability

##### Rendering

Clients **SHOULD** render an ASA's latest ARC5114 metadata. Clients **MAY** render an ASA's previous ARC5114 metadata for changelogs or other historical features.

##### Updating ARC5114 metadata

Only the manager **MAY** update an ASA's ARC5114 metadata. To do so, the manager sends a new `acfg` transaction with the entire metadata represented as JSON in the transaction's `note` field.

##### Making ARC5114 metadata immutable

Managers CANNOT make an ASA's ARC5114 immutable. For immutability refer to [ARC-69](https://github.com/algorandfoundation/ARCs/blob/main/ARCs/arc-0069.md).

### Atomic Transfers Conventions

Atomic Transfers are native to the Algorand blockchain. They are implemented as irreducible batch operations, where a group of transactions are submitted as a unit and either all transactions in the batch pass or fail. We rely on them to implement different actions for SBTs. For example, using Atomic Transfers we can ensure that, every time someone claims a SBT, the token gets instantaneously frozen so they have no time to send it elsewhere (SBT are non-transferable by definition, the only possible transfer should be between the issuer and the claimer). 

In this ARC we outline Atomic Transfers for:

* SBT Claiming
* SBT Revoking

In order for an ASA to be considered an ARC-5114 asset, issuers **MUST** respect both the ASA Parameters and the Atomic Transfers Conventions. Not following these standards may affect the behaviour of the ASA and make it non-compliant with the concepts described in [this paper](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4105763).

#### SBT Claiming

After a SBT has been issued by a transaction following both the ASA Parameters Conventions and the JSON Metadata File Schema, it is ready to be claimed. The process of claiming a token should have the following transactions as part of an Atomic Transfer:

* Claimer opts-in to SBT
* Issuer updates the metadata (`acfg` transaction) to reflect status as "claimed" (all other fields should remain the exact same)
* Issuer sends SBT to claimer's account
* Issuer freezes the SBT in claimer's account

#### SBT Revoking

After a SBT has been claimed, it may be revoked by the issuer. The process of revoking a token should have the following transactions as part of an Atomic Transfer:

* Issuer unfreezes the SBT
* Issuer updates the metadata (`acfg` transaction) to reflect status as "revoked" (all other fields should remain the exact same)
* Issuer clawbacks the SBT from claimer's account

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).